An explanation is acceptable, but the truth of the
matter is I drank beer with my friend about two
hours when I got to the airport last night.
Suffering agony and pain this morning. No, thank
you. Just iced tea would be fine.
There's presently a A developing controversy in
North Carolina and the other northeastern states
on this potential evulsion has to do with
pollution of the Atlantic coast. What role do you
think scientists ought to play, academicians and
scientists like yourself, in offering advice,
opposition to, support for this environmental
concern? Well, I think we are the people that
should give the advice. When I say we, I mean
environmental scientists because that's what I
became after I came down here, but a lot of this
horror that people express is based on a lack of
knowledge and I don't think people can just sit at a
desk at a university campus and come up with a whole
answer. For example, Savannah a couple years ago,
one of the companies that's been dumping sulfuric
acid in the Savannah River, was ordered to stop
doing that, so they decided to dump it in the ocean
the way national lead does off the coast of New
Jersey. And right away the sports fishermen in
North Carolina put up a big clamor that they're
going to destroy the Gulf Stream because this
sulfuric acid is going to be carried to the coast of
North Carolina. And the people in the Division of
Fisheries, whatever it's called in Raleigh, got
all worked up over this. Well, I sat down and did a
little chemical oceanography with the numbers
and showed that every day the Gulf Stream carries
past North Carolina about 20,000 times as much
sulfuric acid as what they were proposing to dump
in and off Georgia. And also equally greater
amounts of the trace metals that were going in with
it that people were concerned with. This is a desk
study, which is fun to do. But on the other hand, off
New Jersey, where they've been dumping this now
for 20 years, the fishing is actually a little
better than it used to be. The sports fishermen
actually go out to look for the acid ground as a
place to fish, because there's enough iron oxide
on the bottom, so the character of the bottom has
changed. And apparently, this attracts the kind
of fish they're chasing. So here's something
based on an actual observation of what's been
going on for 20 years. And yet the people of North
Carolina didn't have any knowledge of this and
immediately set up a big clamor against it. And
this happens over and over again. This dumping of
sewage sludge off of New York City, for example.
You talk about the Dead Sea there. That's not so.
I've looked at cores that the Army engineers had
taken off New York Bight in this area. And you can't
see any organic matter in the cores. It's just good
gray gravel with pieces of brick in it. The organic
matter is being removed very rapidly. So again,
these assertions about polluting the ocean are
based on a lack of knowledge and lack of
observation. Did you become irritated when a man
like Jacques Cousteau says, for example, that the
sea is dying? No, because I admire Cousteau very
much as an engineer and as an entrepreneur of
television movies, but he's not qualified to
speak about what he sees dying because he's never
made a measurement of productivity in his life. He
really doesn't know what that means. So it's a
statement that doesn't carry any weight with me.
Do you think that environmental publicists, to
coin a word, are good for or bad for oceanography?
That is, that a man like Cousteau, for example, or
half a dozen others I can think of, have acquired a
great amount of publicity for the oceans. Is this
essentially a good thing? I don't think it hurts.
It's strange. When I was small and told people I was
going to be an oceanographer, they'd say, oh, do
you know William Beebe? And then later on, when I
said I was an oceanographer, they would say, oh, do
you know Rachel Carson? And now they say, do you
know Jacques Cousteau? So it always takes
somebody like that to attract public interest to
the field. And I don't see how this hurts.
No. In terms of public interest to the field,
quality of oceanographic education in the United
States, having been involved in at least three
different types of institutions and having also
taught? What do you think? Is it capable, not
capable? I think there's variation. I think that
the best schools are considerably better than the
worst schools. There's a great gradient. And if I
were to hire a young man with a recent PhD in
oceanography, I would consider carefully the
school he got it from as one of the main criteria in
deciding whether to hire him. Are Scripps and
Woods Hole still the premier schools in
oceanography at this time? I don't think Woods
Hole is much of a school yet. They just recently got
into the school business. But Scripps certainly,
well, I have to say that because I came from there.
Well, the whole point, the point is, or the
question I'm trying to ask, is that it's been
almost impossible, for example, in my
profession, history, to take a school and make it a
first-ranked school. My degree's from the
University of Texas. It's a good second-ranked
school. That's fine. You know, it's about as good
in history as North Carolina, possibly not quite
so, a little better than Tulane, not quite as good
as the University of Michigan, and a mile away from
Harvard and Yale. It's the same thing true in
oceanography. Can you make an oceanographic
institution a first-rate school? Well, I think
some of those that have started pretty much from
scratch have done very well. The Johns Hopkins
operation, I think, was first right from the very
beginning. Miami, I'd say, never has quite gotten
off the ground. Now, this leads to another
question about academic education. Originally,
the concept of oceanography was to bring together
people from a vast number of scientific
disciplines excuse me, attach them to one place,
and that was the School of Oceanography. Really,
their only collective academic interest was the
oceans, right? And each one put an input into the
discipline itself. So there's no such thing, in
effect, as oceanography. Let me explain it this
way. However, lately oceanography has become,
once more, more divided. That is, chemical
oceanographers talk to chemical
oceanographers.
Is this the way you perceive I've
seen it develop another way. We've
gone from oceanography to marine science, and
oceanography is a study of the ocean and its
contents, but marine science is everything that
you have to do from a ship, and this includes marine
meteorology, which not many places do, but it also
includes all this sort of stuff that Lamont
Doherty does, and all this, and this deep-sea
drilling project of NSF, which doesn't pay any
attention to the ocean. To them, the ocean is a damn
nuisance. They wish somebody would pull the plug
out, let the water out, and then they could walk
around instead of having to go out on the ship. So
that There has been a change then from the point of
view of studying the ocean as a system to studying
the Earth's crust under the ocean, but still call
this oceanography and get the oceanographic
support for it, which has in the past distressed me
a little bit. For example, when Lamont went into
the IGY, the IGY was set up to do synoptic
observations. How do you do synoptic geologic
studies of the ocean floor. There's no particular
need to do them one year as compared with another
year. And yet they got a lot of funding during the
IGY for carrying on just what they'd always been
doing.
There are glamour disciplines in oceanography,
if I may try it this way. For example, everybody
wants to be, in effect, a nuclear physicist in the
1950s. In oceanography presently, some parts of
it are in eclipse, that is physical oceanography
and as a matter of fact marine oceanography in the
sense of marine biology.
What do you think will be the glamour fields for
oceanography in the future? Well, I think that the
big thrust in the future has to come from resource
exploitation and this is fisheries and and waste
disposal. In other words, studying the effects of
man-made pollution on the ocean. Okay, so you see
oceanography turning into a type of
environmental studies?
Yeah. People used to ask me, Whenever I said I was an
oceanographer, by the way, in the middle of the
60s, what about getting fresh water from the sea? I
said, that's not an oceanographic problem. We've
solved the problem. We provide the seawater. No
one is an engineering problem.
What sort of technological breakthroughs do you
think occurred during your experience with
oceanography that changed the nature of
oceanography? Well, one of the greatest things
was the development of the salinometer so that you
no longer had to determine chlorinity by
titration. and the appalling amount of ignorance
has resulted from that.
Now people, you know, they're no longer reading a
burette, they're reading a meter and they're
reading it to more figures and publishing these
figures and it was kind of revealing during the IGY
when two different groups ran selenometers on the
same samples and they published them side by side
and the results were appallingly unbearable. Do
you think that it's been suggested that the great
age of exploration has ended, in terms of
oceanography, and that now may be a period of
computation? Well, we're in the great age of
exploration as regards to seafloor with the
deep-sea drilling project. We have by no means
wiped that up yet. There's a lot more going on. And
of course, the breakthrough on development plate
tectonics and the, finally people are willing to
admit that there's such a thing as continental
drift. That occurred in the early 1960s and that
was another great breakthrough. I'll tell you a
little anecdote about that. A guy named Mason out
at Scripps, an Englishman, wanted to do just a
bunch of routine magnetometer surveys of the
ocean, and Scripps couldn't give him the ship
time, but he found out that the Coast Survey was
commissioning a ship, I think it was called the
Pioneer, and that the time was being paid for by the
Navy, so he cut together with Roger Revell to see if
he couldn't have his magnetometer towed by this
Coast and Genetic Survey vessel, and Roger got a
hold of me, and I went on into our I dragged her fur
and got down on my knees and said, let's put this in
the operation plan for the pioneer to tow this
magnetometer. And the captain said, yes, but the
first time this interferes with the other vital
things, they'll have orders to cut it away. And I
said, well, that's all right. We'll put that in the
orders. And of course, these guys in the co-survey
are too smart to cut away a magnetometer. They'd
hold it in whenever there was trouble. And they
produced the detailed bathymetry and the
detailed magnetic data that convinced people
that this was a good way to go to keep continuing
these studies and this led to the work of mine and so
on on the
fractionation, fracture of the sea floor along
the mid-ocean ridges and led to this tremendous
breakthrough in the understanding of plate
tectonics and so I take a little bit of credit for
being one link in the chain that they got this thing
underway. Or does it strike you that in science
many things like this seem almost accidental?
Sure.
Which is, it seems as if your discipline is
swinging away from the idea of basic research and
more and more specific research. Do you think
these accidental discoveries will begin to
diminish when this occurs? No, no. These things
keep turning up. They discovered the equatorial
undercurrent by fishing for
whatever they were fishing for and finding that
the fishing lines were trailing in strange ways
and they developed the New England swordfish
fishery on the basis of going out just to, Frank
Mather wanted to catch a few fish and borrowed this
long line gear from the Bureau of Commercial
Fisheries and the man broke a leg so they left the
gear overnight, landed the man to sent to the
hospital, went back and picked it up and found that
it was loaded with, with swordfish. The way to
catch swordfish was to set long lines for them
overnight. That led to the big swordfish industry
in New England and that in turn was killed when some
guy, some graduate student invented a way of
determining mercury with ten times more
precision than they had in the past and he found
that there was a hell of a lot of mercury in
swordfish. An accidental discovery one way, an
accidental discovery the other way. What about
the computer? What's it going to do to your
discipline?
Well, certainly the use of a computer is a very
expeditious way to handle large bodies of data. I
think Walter Munk was one of the first guys to apply
the computer to solving problems of physical
oceanography. It's certainly simplified his
analysis of wave and tide observations. someday
every oceanographic observation that's ever
been taken will be on a computer and you can
interrogate the computer and ask how much has the
climate changed in the last ten years in terms of
temperatures at a given point. I don't think we're
there yet. It's tremendously expensive, of
course, but it's just the way to go. You seem to
regret that people don't go to sea that much
anymore in terms of oceanographic research or
that the direction may be in maybe going that way.
So many guys get seasick and then spend the rest of
their career trying to design a buoy system so that
they don't have to go out in person. On the other
hand, you have all these scuba guys who think that
the only way to find out anything is to go down
themselves in scuba, which is alright. You can
find out a limited amount of things in certain
areas, but I don't think scuba is the answer. I
don't think little submarines are the answer
either. I think all these things contribute, but I
think surface ships and Nansen bottles are going
to be with us for a long, long time to come. Well, my
next question, as a matter of fact, was what about
undersea gear? Have these, has undersea gear's
technological breakthrough changed the nature
of oceanography? I don't think so. Look at the
drift of the Ben Franklin, for example. This was
given a vast amount of publicity by Grumman as a
great breakthrough. End of the trip, but... They
had virtually nothing to show for it, and they gave
the thing away. It cost them $4 million, and they
gave it away for $25,000. So you think that at least
in the way you perceive the future, guys will still
go to the sea in ships and still will do that manual
labor and drag those cables and... Lower
enantiobottles on a wire. Nobody had us figure out
how to do chemistry in deep water except by
lowering an enantiobottle on a wire. Now,
finally, if you had to sum up what you assumed were
your accomplishments... in a long career of
oceanography, what would you cite for yourself?
Well, I helped build up the Division of
Oceanography at the Hydrographic Office into a
fairly competent organization with people who
could react quickly to solve the Navy's immediate
requirements in oceanographic information.
In NSF, I launched a few ships and built a few
buildings that are, I think, still serving. The
buildings, at least, are serving their purpose. I
think most of the ships now have been superseded.
And that's about all. It's your time now. What
would you like to say about oceanography, to be
remembered, that I didn't ask you?
Well, I always like to bring up Henry B. Bigelow. I
think he's one of the most neglected figures in the
history of American oceanography. When I was last
with the government, I tried hard to get him one of
the President's Science Medals before he died,
and I was unsuccessful. One year, it was because
the guy in the Department of Interior, who could
have been most instrumental in pushing this,
wanted to get the medal himself. And I did get him
the Compass Award from the publishers of Undersea
Technology in one year. Unfortunately, by that
time he was too old and feeble to accept the award in
person, and Qualify had to appear for him. But
Henry Bigelow certainly is the father of American
oceanography, and he's one of the figures that has
been most neglected.
Who struck you in oceanography, whom you remember
beside Bigelow with fondness? Oh, I've got all
kinds of friends.
Tommy Thompson at University of Washington was a
wonderful guy.
He was a real seagoing chemist. The guy I worked for
at Scripps, Muhlberg, was a great guy in his way.
F.G. Walton Smith at the University of Miami is a
wonderful character. He's been a real
entrepreneur in directing interest to the
Florida area.
Then there was a whole bunch of people who came out
of Scripps at the end of the war, who now fill high
positions around ocean and gravity
institutions. Art Maxwell at ONR. Dale Leeper was
at Texas, now is at Monterey.
Wayne Burt was at Oregon where he really built that
institution up from nothing in a remarkably short
time.
Gene Lafond is a character I've been associated
with and I'm tremendously proud to have known
because Gene had done a lot of tremendous things in
his day.
Now, Just a couple of things while I've got the tape
recorder running. Why was there opposition to
Revelle coming back to head scripts?
The opposition that he maintains came from
Shepard and from...
The fish man. The fish man, right. Yeah. Well, his
name would come to me if I... Yeah, I'll think of it
in a minute. Carl Hubs. Carl Hubs, right. Well,
people have their own personal ambitions and
people have their, have their, also their ideas
about how the, how the organization should be
structured. Many departments at universities
like to have a week department head. They'll pick
some fairly junior associate professor and put
him in there for five years to handle the paperwork
and to do what they tell him to do. The senior
professors get together, they have their own
caucus and they arrive at the decision and then
they tell the department head what to tell the
dean. Of course, you can't imagine Roger Revelle
working that way. Roger is a strong man wherever he
is and So naturally, the people who prefer this
other kind of organization would not be happy
about that. I can remember Roger's predecessor at
Charter Scripps, Carl Eckert, telling me that two
things that really led to his decision to retire as
director and just go on being a professor. Of
course, one of the beauties of the academic world
is that you can quit a higher job than professor and
you always get tenure as a professor. You can't do
this necessarily in the Navy, but he had told one of
the buildings and ground, and I think it was Carl
Johnson, to do something. And Carl said, have you
cleared this with Roger? And Carl said, I realized
then that I was just a damn figurehead, that there
was no point in my trying to be the director of
script. And secondly, why did Monk not receive
clearance? Was it because of his birthplace?
Yeah. Monk and Swerder were both foreign born, you
see, and I don't think either one was a citizen. I
don't think Swerder was a citizen then. And in 1940
and 41 we had tremendous security problems.
Swerder told me one time that he had been cleared of
all charges except associating with Monk. And
Monk was cleared of all charges except
associating with Swerder. And it was Roger
Revelle who finally who finally straightened
that one out and got them clearances and it
certainly was to the benefit of the Navy that they
did this because a whole lot of guys have been
drowned on beaches and nothing for the fact that
it's right over the bunker for working for the
Navy.
Nothing else I want to know unless you want to add
something. I can't do anything this minute. Okay.